hey guys I gotta tell you I think I have
got one of the best logs that I have
ever cut on my wood-mizer here with me
today this is a figured maple that I had
a customer bring me and again they had a
difficult time finding someone that was
willing to do this log I'd cut some
other things for them before and it was
one that I asked them if they would
please bring it here to me at my home so
that I can saw it here and have a little
bit more time and more tools and things
available at my resources to move it
around this thing is gigantic and so as
they brought it to me I understood that
I was going to have to do a little bit
of chainsaw work to it to get this whole
thing able to work out and I'm gonna
walk here on the log here a little bit
and show you just why this is kind of
challenging but also at the same time
what we want to use as much of our
capabilities as possible to cut this
thing because there's tremendous value
in this figured maple log that they
brought me let's take a look at it right
now as we approach this log this figured
maple you can see all these kind of
Burling and figure around the outside of
the log and it is absolutely everywhere
all the way around it
and then when we get to this side you'll
see where the customer started cutting
it down on the side there and even at
that when we look up close you can see
oh my gosh look at all of the figure
that is in that so this is going to be
quite a fun project to do back it up a
little bit here and you can see kind of
how that was cut now the challenge is a
Sawyer when we look at something like
this is that first of all it is too big
for my mill as it currently is the
wood-mizer lt40 that I run can handle a
log that is up to thirty six inch
diameter that's a bit early around
it's not rounded as curvature to it and
other issues that would affect the
ability you saw this properly so what I
have to do is I have to go ahead and get
out the chainsaw and do a little bit of
work clean up where they started cutting
and cut that off and I might take that
and turn that into some bowls or
something because it's not going to be
really useful for lumber but I think
that we're gonna have a good time today
cutting this up so let's get started
[Music]
as you can see now that I've cut that it
is certainly a lot straighter I've
gotten rid of that bump on the bottom as
we walk around here you can see the
color difference from the old to the new
from what I've cut there so I'm gonna go
fire up the skid steer and tip this
thing over I'm going to try to set it on
the mill and it's going to take a bit of
craft to cut this one down let's see
what happens
[Applause]
[Music]
now that I have this awesome maple log
up on the mill I have to go about
starting to cut it so this is now
approximately chainsaw down to the
maximum diameter that this mill can
handle you're gonna see that I'm gonna
have to still rotate it and take cuts
around the outside just to get it to a
reasonable working size and they're
still chainsaw marks from the other side
from where the customer had cut it
across before so there's a little bit to
work around but we have a lotta log to
work with here so there's going to be a
little bit of scrap but there is I think
we're gonna have some very beautiful
wood in this
[Music]
[Applause]
well guys I got to be honest I thought
after I did don't tell my wife how I did
this video and it went crazy with I
think we're almost at 2 million or over
2 million views now but I would kind of
be done doing stuff like this um little
wood dust in my mouth but this is the
kind of thing those videos have a lot of
power in the fact that they bring me
work I get to do that other people would
never get to do and have a lot of fun
doing it so let's continue cutting this
log
[Music]
[Applause]
[Laughter]
[Music]
I want to share something with you guys
about cutting a log like this a little
bit of insider information some of you
watch this video because your Sawyer's
yourself and you like to see different
techniques and you like to see how other
people do things some of you are new to
saw milling and you want to know if
certain things are possible if you can
really do them ya with enough motivation
you can do just about anything and with
enough time and enough chainsaw chains
and gas and lubricant you can pull off
just about any job jobs like this are
difficult and one of the reasons is
because of all the work you got to put
into them but there's always a point in
time when I know I finally got the job
licked and that's when I'm reaching this
point that I'm about at now you
eventually reach a point where you've
got it straight enough and you've made
enough cuts around that now you know
from here on out there's probably not
going to be any more chainsaw work
there's probably not going to be any
more funny rotating the log around or
anything like that and I think that I'm
just about there now so let's go let's
finish it out
[Music]
okay if you can see here on this last
cut I hit a nail right there
and shiny thing right there and that
nail will dull blade so I need to change
the blade out right now to finish
cutting this log
all right so this log is officially a
pain in the rear now I thought I had hit
a nail but it was very robust whatever I
hit and I'm trying to dig this out of
here now to see if we can figure out
exactly what it was it is stuck in here
but whatever it is it's very substantial
so I'm gonna go get another tool to try
to pry this out and cut it out of here
all right this is the picture of what it
is here you can see that is a thick
metal strap that is embedded into this
log I have no idea how far it goes
through all right well I'm gonna keep
going on this let's see where I get all
right after digging in this for a little
bit longer I discovered that this metal
strap has a twin there's one right there
and there's the other one so I'm gonna
have to make an executive decision here
I realized that this is really too far
into this log to be able to cut this and
have any success without going through
every blade that I have and so the
decision that I'm making now is that I'm
going to cut this log right about here
cut down with the chainsaw in the hopes
that those straps are going that
direction and then I can cut the rest of
this into short stock which should be
just fine for whatever purposes that we
have in mind for it well guys this log
is what we call a butt kicker there's
nothing else that I can say about it
that metal strap in there is going
somewhere
I cut it where I thought would be a safe
distance away from that strap and I got
about four inches into it and I
obviously hit metal so now my chain on
my chain saw is ruined
so the next thing to do is to try to cut
even higher yet - probably like about
another six inches above that and see if
that metal strap is continuing to go up
there
I have other commitments today so I got
to come back to this for you watching it
will make a difference but for me I got
to come back to this that's supposed to
rain all day tomorrow and I work outside
cover of the mill up at night and so
it's gonna be a couple days until I can
even get back to this so then I'm gonna
have to resume recording for you all
when I get all my stuff together and be
able to do this so we're two sawmill
blades in hopefully the third one I put
in is the last and I'm just saying this
is what you get into when you get into
some of these large logs that come from
a person's house or neighborhood you
will cut into it relatively speaking
you'll cut ten or fifteen years into
that log and then you'll find something
that someone nailed or strapped in there
from I don't know 40 years ago and there
you go so we'll come back to this and
you'll see me in a second which will be
a couple days take care guys
okay I felt inclined to say one more
thing before I come back in a second to
finish up this log don't give up
sometimes things are just difficult and
there's a lot of life lessons to be
learned and this is one of those don't I
don't get this hardened when this stuff
happens it doesn't bother me it used to
but it doesn't bother me anymore because
there are serious lessons learned in
something like this and so much better
than this victimization ideology that
seems to exist today where everybody
thinks they've had a hard life but have
really overcome nothing except for maybe
the sofa in their parents basement this
here is stuff that grows life in
commission and it grows good character
and so these are the kind of things that
I want to raise my kids in maybe not
sawmilling but I want them to know that
when things happen you don't blow up and
you don't get irritated but you fix the
problem and you move on so there you go
there's the moral of this whole story
let's finish this log
[Music]
okay guys it's time to show you why this
wood was worth saving this is something
I know that you all want to see look at
that you can see guys all the figure
that's in this wood is just absolutely
crazy now I got another big piece that I
want to show you here real quick here's
another couple pieces
[Music]
here's some close-up shots look at that
just absolutely stunning hopefully you
can see that
one thing the sawmilling business has
taught me is about never giving up every
now and then I'll get some young guys
that are working with me
and we'll ask them the question about
halfway through the day when they start
thinking like oh my gosh this is really
tough and moving these heavy boards is
awful and I'll ask them this one
question I'll say son what do you think
sawmilling is about and has usual I get
kind of a dull look in the eyes and I
say sawmilling is about winning every
time that you approach something you're
going to run into difficulty you know I
think that work is about teaching life
lessons as well it's not just about
monotonous labor that goes on and on and
is this mind numbing thing that you
never get any enjoyment out of work
should be enjoyable and it should be a
challenge and you should have a lot of
joy in overcoming those challenges and
so that's part of what I've learned
about doing this business it's just
finding joy in what you do yeah it can
be difficult work at times but it's
worth it
and so that's why I've kept doing this
over the years this maple log was
absolutely beautiful
and it's a shining example of why it's
worth putting in the extra effort
sometimes to get something that's really
worthwhile guys I hope that you've
enjoyed watching this video if you like
what you're seeing here please go ahead
and subscribe
I have woodworking videos I saw a
million videos guys if you would go
ahead and subscribe that would be
awesome
hope you have a great day calculator